John Backus
91 Saint Germain Avenue
SAN FRANCISCO, California 94114
U.S.A.

5th of April 1979

Dear John,
thank you for your long --and nice!-- letter of March 28, 1979,
which arrived this morning. Let me quote from a letter from an other friend
who commented on EWD 692:

"[you wrote] "show how repetitive Backus writes". An adverb is required.
But better "to reveal his repetitious style".

I get the impression that Backus annoyed you by his ill-founded attack
on proofs of program correctness. But your defece (on page 1) is really
rather brief. Your counterattack concentrates on:
(1) the inefficiency of functional forms, even on highly parallel
hardware
(2) the inconvenience of using combinators rather than named formal
parameters
(3) the tedium of algebraic proofs
(4) repetitious style, and agressive overselling.

I do not know how widely you propose to distribute EWD692. In a way I hope
not too widely. But in another way, your defence of the use of logic should
be promulgated very widely indeed. Could I persuade you to moderate the tone
and narrow the range of your counterattack to points (1) and (2)?

My own view is that abstract functional techniques provide a valuable
mathematical tool for the formulation and solution of certain kinds of problem.
We should certainly not exclude it from our intellectual repertoire."

For you information I quote from my answer:

"That I wrote an adjective instead of an adverb was stupid, for I
know the rule perfectly well. My problem is that in Dutch the adverb has
all but disappeared a few centuries ago, and when writing English I have to
apply the rule consciously. Thanks for the reminder.[...]
EWD692 is not intended for wide distribution, it betrays too much an-
noyanceat the fact that Backus presented his thing by way of Turing lecture,
the glamour of which immediate caused the significance of functional pro-
gramming to be overrated beyond justification. I noticed false hopes within
[... ... ...]and some compensating noises seemed required; EWD692, I am
happy to report, has done its job. Your points
(1) the inefficiency of functional forms, even on highly parallel
hardware
(2) the inconvenience of using combinators rather than named parameters
need to be stressed, and I am sure that both you and I shall do so, but if
we wait a little while, we can do so without mentioning John Backus in par-
ticular. With your view of "abstract functional techniques " I agree : they
are safe tools, so let's use them by all means whenever they are appropriate!"

-2-

I trust that the above quotation from my letter explains what EWD692
was: a political pamphlet where a political pamphlet seemed needed, a need
that, I hope unintentionally , you yourself had created . My guess is that,
had you fully realized the glamour of the Turing Lecture --and the lack of
independent judgement of most of its audience-- you had made more sober use
of your eloquence.

You raise the question why I did not send you a copy . Of course I
thought about it. I can reassure you that it was not that I was "too embarrassed".
Well, you have given the answer yourself on page 4 of your
letter "Perhaps the worst aspects of an emotional attack such as EWD692
is that it tends to cut off technical communication." Between you and me
I definitely prefer to discuss on the technical level our subject deserves.
So, why polute it by politics?
                              *               *
                                      *

Allow me to correct an erroneous impression your letter tells me I have
made. You write in the 3rd paragraph "It seems to me (and to many others,
I assure you) that some of your recent polemics are based too much on a need
to be at stage center and to thrust your private opinions at the public on
the basis that since they are the opinions of Dijkstra they must be right and
do not need the careful justification that the opinions of others require."
I am unaware of any "need to be at stage center", on the contrary! The vast
majority of invitations to speak I decline, almost none of my writings are
submitted for publication , and I send my writings to about a dozen people.
Does that reveal "a need to be at stage center"? I don't think so. And
what "recent polemics" did you have in mind? My comments on the DoD languages?
If so , it might clarify the situation for you to know that I did not offer
them to the SIGPLAN Notices, but that their editor asked me whether he would
be allowed to include them. And for the fact that they contained "my private
opinions" no apology is needed: that was what had been asked for by the DoD.
Dr do you have my comments on the DeMillo/Lipton/Perlis paper in the Software
Engineering Notes in mind? Again I draw your attention to the fact that they
have been included upon their Editor's request, and that I abstained from
joining the subsequent discussion. (I shall not deny that my comments on
the DM/L/P papers were composed as disagreeable as I could make them! The
blokes had asked for such a treatment, and I was perfectly willing to show
them that two could play at that game.)

Furthermore you need not worry about my "ego"; in large parts of my
country the "ego" is considered as a not very helpful invention of t he
psychologists and we very much doubt whether it makes much sense t o have
one: "explanation" of people's behaviour in terms of it is seldomly inspiring .
                              *               *
                                      *

One technical point. I did indeed doubt whether you had grasped the
full implications of axiomatic semantics, viz. that they can be used to de-
fine programming language semantics independent of any underlying computational

-4-

model , and subsequently allow you to deal with the correctness issue fully
ignoring that the program text allows admits the interpretation of executable
code. Once you have learned how to reason about the correctness of programs
without dragging computational histories into the picture,the arguments doing
the latter become very clumsy and unconvincing indeed. Your letter --referring
to "the object program machinery that replaces formal variables by actual
one" that a program may or may not require-- only confirm that doubt.
                             *               *
                                     *

I was very sorry to read that yours was a difficult letter to write .
For that difficulty I owe you my apologies. Although..... it was a pleasant
letter to receive and good old Samuel Johnson already stated that "What is
written without effort is in general read without pleasure."

Or to end with another Johnsonian quotation "A man, Sir, should keep
his friendship in constant repair."

With my greetings and best wishes,
yours ever,
prof.dr.Edsger W.Dijkstra
Burroughs Research Fellow
