May 15 1979
Burroughs Mission Viaje
714 768 2170

Prof. Dr. Edsger W. Dijkstra
Plataanstraat 5
5671 AL NUENEN
THE NETHERLANDS

Dear Edsger,

Thanks for you letter of April 24 ; I apologize for the delay
in answering. I am happy to hear that you will give a talk at
the IBM San Jose Lab. I am pleased to report that I have been
able to arrange for special honorarium in your case, thus I can
say that the lab offers to pay your local expenses (travel, lodging,
meals, etc.) associated with your visit to the lab, plus an honorarium
of $300. Any day in August or September that you suggest will be
fine (although John William hopes it won't be in the week of August
20, since he will be on vacation then). I presume that you may want
to come in the latter part of the week of August 6, or the early
part of the week of September 3; if so, IBM will of course cover
your expenses over the weekend and so forth, before the Programming
Methodology Institute, or after the WG 2.3 meeting. If you have any
further requirements, please let me know.

Do you plan to attend the whole two weeks of the Institute? the
whole week of the WG meeting ? I tentatively plan to attend most of
the Institute meetings; if you do too, we shall have plenty of time
to compare notes and debate the relative merits of our two approaches.
I have been looking at combining the two: applying methods motivated
by yours and Tony's to what I consider better languages. I have
hopes that the result will be even better precision and concision of
expression plus theorems of greater generality and usefulness that
can be used to help guide the construction of a program and
to guarantee its correctness. We shall see.

If you will send me an abstract of your talk, it will
help in publicizing it. (By the way, the topic you suggest
sounds very interesting, there are a number of people at the
lab who are interested in distributed computation.) There
is considerable excitement here at the news that you will be
giving a talk. I plan on having it publicized in the San Jose
Research lab, the Santa Teresa lab (develops programs, quite
a large place), the Los Gatos lab, and a number of other IBM
places in the Bay Area.

In closing, let me say that I appreciated your last letter.

Best regards,

John Backus
91 Saint Germain Avenue
San Francisco, CA 94114


bcc: W. F. King,  S. P. Ghosh, J. H. Williams

P.S We would like to invite you to have dinner
with a small group of us the evening of your talk.
