John Backus
91 Saint Germain Avenue
SAN FRANCISCO, CA 94114
U.S.A.

24th April 1979

Dear John,

thank you very much for your --also nice !-- letter of 18th April 1979.
You are very honest and the letter is illuminating . You write:

"The real course of computer science is determined, in the long run at
least, by new truths and discoveries, new techniques, new insights not by
the opinions of people without "independent judgement" that are influenced
by political pamphlets."

Yes, of course, but! I would fully agree if everybody who could contribute
would ignore what you call "the ninnies"; if that condition were satisfied
we would live in an almost ideal world. The sad fact is that ninnies do have
influence, for instance in the process of assigning research budgets. Not
the opinion of ninnies, but the possible consequences of their opinions is
what matters: by diverting research opportunities they can easily retard
progress very much. For instance, writing the DM/L/P rebuttal was not fun
at all. Yet someone had to do it, someone had to accept that task, no matter
how unpleasant! In retrospect I am glad someone did it. Messages of "thanks"
have reached me from officers of funding agencies, who found themselves in
· great difficulties when defending some research proposals in which they believed
for good reason, but found themselves unable to convince their superiors
, because their superiors had received the DM/L/P paper, the contents of
which were taken as the gospel truth --mainly on the authority of P.-- .
The lower officers were grateful for my rebuttal which served as an antidote.
You may regret this state of affairs as much as I do, but there is no point
in denying it.

You write:

"I am interested in trying to understand what is and what isn't useful
and important; my paper was a sincere effort to explain some insights that
took me a lot of effort to acquite and that I hoped would be _useful_ to others
who do have independent judgement."

Sure, I fully believe you. But again: it is not the one with independent
judgement I was worried about! I don't need to help him to make up his mind!
I was worried about the impression made upon the non-expert --the "ninny"--
whose opinion matters for the sake of its consequences. I had good reason
to be worried about that. You are not the person to be overawed by the
"glamour" [my god!] of the Turing lecture, but, regretfully enough, not all
people are that immune. Please reread the first paragraph of p.2 of my pre-
vious letter --in the meantime you are free to change the word "hope" of the
3rd line into "fully trust"-- .

-2-

When you write in the first paragraph of your last letter "I cannot under-
stand why an egoless person should be interested etc.". Well, to put it
bluntly : to repair some of the havoc of unbalanced opinions that you had
created. And again : whether these were the opinions of people you care
about, is neither here nor there.....

You write "What am I to make of this response? " Can I help you by
stressing that I make a great difference between "your work" and "your
Turing lecture"? I regard --and continue to regard-- your work (as I wrote)
as "a valid research effort".

I must, finally, ask you again not to try to understand me in the
psychologist's jargon. I know enough Latin to know what "ego" meant originally ,
I also know enough Greek to know what "hubris" meant originally, but as
technical terms of the psychologist we don't find them very helpful. As long
as you insist on explaining my behaviour in those terms, my letters will
remain "puzzling", I am afraid.
                            *               *
                                    *

I would be delighted to give a talk at the San Jose IBM Laboratory;
visiting the place will be a new experience for me, I have never been in
San Jose. I think that a rather recent result --the detection of termination
of diffusing computations-- would be an appropriate topic. I once showed it
to my students, and could do so in twice 45 minutes, but it was almost the
first instance they saw --from me, at least-- of distributed computations.

With my greetings and warmest regards,
yours ever,

prof.dr.Edsger W.Dijkstra
Burroughs Research Fellow.

P.S.  Peace!
               EWD

normal: 1 15 lecture
1 hr discussion after lecture
