April 18, 1979

Prof. Dr. Edsger W. Dijkstra
Plataanstraat 5
5671 AL NUENEN
The NETHERLANDS


Dear Edsger,

I returned yesterday from a brief vacation to find your
friendly response to my letter. I am pleased that you found my
letter "nice" and "pleasant to...receive". Nevertheless your letter
was puzzling. You write what you yourself call a "political pamphlet"
in an effort to do a political hatchet job on a serious and long
effort of mine to make a contribution to our field, you distribute
it behind my back, I reproach you for this; what is your explanation?
You say that the "glamour" [my god!] of the Turing lecture had apparently
raised "false hopes" among some people without "independent judgement"
about the possibilities of functional programming, and that therefore
"some compensating noises seemed required". I can't understand why
an egoless person should be interested in influencing the opinions
of a mass of people without independent judgement about the work of
someone else, and not even by honest argument and analysis, but by
a cynical and invidious "political" hatchet job ("I am reminded of
the [NATO] general ... " and other such gems). Apparently you feel
satisfied that your prestige has convinced these ninnies without any
sense of their own to believe your hatchet job, and you seem well
satisfied with your handiwork, and suffer not the slightest embarrass-
ment.

What am I to make of this response? You have informed me that
with respect to my work and god knows what else, you are a politician
rather than a computer scientist. I accept that if you really wish me
to. I really don't care if by chance I convinced someone, or even
hordes of people without independent judgement, that functional programming
is the best thing since sliced bread, or if your hatchet job caused them
to reverse their view entirely. I'm interested in trying to understand
what is and what isn't useful and important; my paper was a sincere
effort to explain some insights that took me a lot of effort to acquire
and that I hoped would be _useful_ to others who do have independent
judgement.

My letter was an effort to point out to you both the dangers of
emphasis on political rather than computer science activities,
and the cause for that emphasis. Apparently you cannot see the danger
and even less the cause. That saddens me because it means that in-
evitably you will waste a lot of your time and talent. If you cannot
even suspect your efforts to woo the "great unwashed masses" with EWD692
(for who else would take seriously such a hasty and obvious political
pamphlet?) was a consequence of hubris, if you really believe you are
free of a problem that affects all of humanity, and you more than most,
then I cannot help you.

-2-

At least let me point out on the practical level, a fact about
political activities such as we are discussing. The real course of
computer science is determined, in the long run at least, by new
truths and discoveries, new techniques, new insights, not by the
opinions of people without "independent judgement" that are influenced
by political pamphlets. Thus Demillo-Lipton-Perlis might influence
a lot of ninnies with their political pamphlet, and yours might change
their minds again, but in the long haul the fate of program verification
depends on the realities of the progress made in the field and its
real usefulness as determined by competent people who can see for them-
selves what the facts are. Neither their "ugly" paper nor your nasty
reply will have much bearing on the outcome, except that a lot of
ninnies will be induced to cheer for one side or the other.

Similarly, if it turns out that the proposals I have made have
flaws that make them useless, EWD692 will not contribute to their
discovery and will then appear as the foolish tempest in a teapot
that it is. If it turns out otherwise, EWD692 will appear as evidence
of your poor insight and envious hostility. In either case you will
have wasted time and tarnished your reputation.

I am sorry that your friend feels that I have made an "ill-founded
attack on proofs of program correctness". Perhaps you feel that too.
I assure you that was not my intent, and I think that if your friend
were to read carefully, he would find that I am attacking certain
properties of programming languages that make proofs more difficult
and less general than they might otherwise be; but I do not attack
proofs of correctness, in fact I express considerable admiration for
work in that area. I hope to clarify the language properties that
will contribute to the existence of more general theorems about programs
in a paper I'm working on. If you and your friend can take time out
from your political campaign to discredit this work, you might find
that you will be able to make good use of such properties in languages
that suit you better than mine and thereby find that, when applied to
such languages, your own proof techniques will look even better than
they do now and produce more general and useful theorems about larger
classes of programs.

Thank you for your friendly letter. I have always had considerable
respect for a computer scientist named EWD. Until recently I did not
know there was a rather rascally politician of the same name; I still
wish I hadn't encountered him and hope that he will not continue to
blight our relationship in the future.

Peace

John Backus
91 Saint Germain Avenue
San Francisco, CA 94114

PS. Would you be interested in giving a talk at the
San Jose IBM Lab during your stay on the
West Coast? Many of us would be delighted to have
you do so - I hope you will. If so, let me know + we
can discuss arrangements, honorarium, etc.
