to John Backus
91 Saint Germain Avenue
SAN FRANCISCO, CA 94114
U.S.A.

12th July 1979

Dear John,

my schedule is very tight, and I am afraid that I
must disappoint John Williams: Monday 20 or Tuesday 21
August seem the only two slots that are really available.

I shall arrive in the YSA on Sunday 29th July, and
had already committed myself for the week of Monday
20 July to Burroughs in Mission Viejo. My wife and
the two youngest children will join me for the first
three weeks of the trip, and the week of 6th August
was planned as "the real holiday." Since then Bill
McKeenan has twisted my arm: the programming
course to be given that week was so heavily over-
booked that he asked me to give a second course,
in parallel to David's. Under those circumstances
I would like to avoid further commitments in
the week starting on Monday 13: it is their last
week in the USA, and I have then been working
almost all the time!

Immediately after WG2.3 I shall go to Austin,
Texas (Burroughs and University), and then home!
If I have a completely free choice, I think I
would prefer Monday 20 slightly over Tuesday 21.

-2-

Talk Aug 20 1 30 pm by Prof Dijkstra
IBM Research Lab, San Jose

Now title and abstract:

Title: Termination Detection for Diffusing Computations

Abstract: The activity of a finite computation may
propagate over a network of machines, when machines
may delegate (repeatedly) subtasks to their
neighbours; when such a computation is fired
from a single machine, we call it "a diffusing
computation". We present a signalling scheme
-- to be superimposed on the diffusing computation--
enabling the machine that fired it to detect its
termination. Our signalling scheme is perfectly
general in the sense that, independently of the
topology of the network, it is applicable to
any diffusing computation. (End of abstract.)

Please give my regards to John Williams and tell
him how sorry I am that I shall miss him. I
am not familiar with distance and transport facilities
between Santa Cruz and San Jose. If it is better
when I come to San Jose the day before that
is fine with me; may I leave the logistics to
you? (Wife and children leave on Friday 17th August.)
With my greetings and best wishes,

yours ever

Edsger
